<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
<head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8">
    <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="IE=edge">
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
    <title>Document</title>
</head>
<body>
   <h3><pr> The term zeolite stands for boiling stones(zeo=boiling,olite=stone).Zeolites are
<br>porous ,when water passes through it, it gives the appearance as through water is boiling<br/>
 hence the name zeolite which was discovered and named by a geologist.Zeolite is a 3D silicate.
<br> The chemical composition of zeolites is hydrated sodium aluminium silicate, represented as Na2O.Al2O3.xSiO2.yH2O<br/>
 where x = 2-10 and y = 2-6. Zeolites are capable of exchanging reversibly its sodium ions for hardness causing 
  Ca2+ and Mg2+ in water. Hence zeolites are cation exchangers.</h3><pr/>
  <br>Zeolites are of two types<br/>
<h3>1. Natural zeolites are natural and non-porous having the composition Natural zeolite: Na2O Al2O3 .4SiO2 .2H2O. 2. Synthetic zeolites are porous and posses gel structure and are prepared from china clay, feldspar and a soda ash. Synthetic zeolites posses higher exchange capacity. Zeolites have cage like structure. It is derived from SiO4.
Process: The hard water is passed through a zeolite bed fixed in a cylinder at a specific rate.The hardness causing ions Ca2+, Mg2+ etc are retained by the zeolite as CaZe and MgZe respectively
The reactions taking place during softening process are Na2Ze + Ca(HCO3)2 → CaZe + 2NaHCO3 Na2Ze + Mg(HCO3)2→MgZe + 2NaHCO3 Na2Ze + CaCl2 → 2NaCl + CaZe Na2Ze + MgCl2→ 2NaCl + MgZe
After the use of this process for certain time zeolite is exhausted i.e. all Na+ ions of the zeolite are replaced by Ca+2 and Mg+2 ions and hard water will not be further softened.</h3>

Regeneration:Exhausted zeolite can be regenerated by heating it with brine solution (10% NaCl)
CaZe + 2NaCl → Na2Ze + CaCl2 MgZe + 2NaCl → Na2Ze + MgCl2
Limitations of Zeolite process:
1. Raw water should not contain turbidity. Turbidity will clog the pores of zeolite bed and makes it inactive. Turbidity of water must be removed by coagulation, filtration etc.
2. Mineral acids if present in the water will destroy the zeolite bed permanently. Water must be neutralized with soda before it is fed into zeolite bed.
3. Raw water must be not contain any coloured ions like Mn2+ and Fe2+,because they form manganese zeolite and ferrous zeolite which cannot be regenerated.
Advantages of Zeolite process: 1) It removes hardness almost completely and treated water contains hardness upto 10ppm. 2) No precipitation of the product takes place. Hence no disposal of sludge is required. 3) The equipment is compact and requires less skilled assistance. 4) The process adjusts itself for variation of hardness of incoming water.
Disadvantages of zeolite process: 1) The treated water contains more sodium salts than in lime-soda process. 2) This method replaces only Ca2+ and Mg+2 ions by Na+ ions, leaves acidic ions like HCO3 2- as NaHCO3 and Na2CO3.
and CO3
3) These NaHCO3 salt decompose and liberate CO2 which cause corrosion. 4)The Na2CO3 salt produced in water decomposed due to the high temperature maintained in the boiler to NaoH ,which causes caustic embrittlement.
</body>
</html>
